Yalie: Yet Another Lisp Interpreting Experiment

Classes defined in C should also have a Lisp __init__() call. For
builtin types, it should probably do nothing by default. This allows
the user to define init behavior for builtin types without nuking the
C side of things. This lends itself to "init" and "del" fields in the
class_t objects themselves, for C functions.

map should take any number of lists as arguments. Then functions that
take multiple arguments can zip across several lists in parallel.

what am I going to do about multiple infixes in a s-expr? Done!

Can the only pure function defined in C be "msg"?

Punctuation:
Should not directly call underlying functionality (i.e. msg or ref).
Instead, call macros associated with each symbol (i.e. "backquote" or
"colon") that by default point to the associated function. This makes
it easier for the user to change what punctuation does.

Potential problems with T:
- limited inheritance
- weird setter semantics
- verbose as sin
- methods don't use a different namespace
- dynamically adding/redefining methods
- reflection



inheriting from builtin types risks overwriting the init and del
methods. the programmer needs to be allowed to call the previous
definition by referencing the parent class in some way, and calling
those functions manually.

put in at least some support for array programming. also, generators
(python style) allow for lazy evaluation.

def
defmethod
defclass
deflocal

Two birds with one stone: return to declaring variables with
`let'. Allow (let x `foo) to extend for the duration of the current
scope. Assignment then works like normal, except now it can modify
variables in higher scopes (as with C). This will make it trivial for
methods to modify variables in the member scope. This would make it
much easier to insert declaration optimizations later, as well.

Class/object scoping concept: Class contains a method scope (with
inheritance). Object contains both a method scope and a member scope,
hierarchically unrelated. message lookups calls resolve the method
from the method scope, but method execution is resolved in the member
scope (with temporary bindings for its arguments), which is a child of
the lexical environment of the class declaration.

Priorities:
  Message passing only - automatic get/set methods for members

Issues:
  message resolution
  method scoping
  modifying variables in a higher scope
  collisions with members and methods
  allowing the global scope to be a class def
  inheritance resolution

Alternatively, members can have a $ prefix by convention. Thus, the
actual variable name would refer only to the reference function,
avoiding the name collision issue entirely.

Classes can use layered scopes to achieve local variables. Only
functions are visible in the external scope, but the lexical scope of
those functions themselves is a closure on the class.

Types, stored by classes, should be a const char*. They will be
compared by pointer when testing for type equality, so they should
never be modified. This will make it easier for user-defined types to
be added, and also for printing out type information. A SYMBOL?!?

If everything is to be a method, every scope will have to be
associated with a class. Thus, the global scope will in fact be
implicitly redefining the overarching Object class. But what about
"let" scopes and "fn" scopes etc.? No, that clearly won't work. Scopes
and functions need to be treated normally. Classes should be separate.

Method syntax: the dot '.' is parsed differently based on its position
in an s-expression. As the first element, a method call envelops the
rest of the expression, as so:
(a.foo b c d) ==> (msg a foo b c d)
Anywhere else, the method call is assumed to have no arguments:
(f a.foo b) ==> (f (msg a foo) b)

"for" loop:
(for i to 10 ls i) -> (1 ... 10)
(for i len 10 ls i)-> (0 ... 9)
(for i is 4 to 10 ls i) -> (4 ... 10)
(for i is 4 len 10 ls i) -> (4 ... 13)
(for i is 4 len 10 step -2 ls i) -> (4 2 ... -14)
(for i in `(1 2 3) if (> i 1) do (put i)) ->  "2\n3\n" to stdout

Arithmetic syntax?!!? We could totally expand 3+4*5 to (add 3 (mult 4
5)). That would remove arithmetic symbols from names
though. +-*/^&|<>=.  An alternative solution would be to only do it
when there's full whitespace separation. As in "foo-bar" is a name,
but "foo - bar" is "(minus foo bar)".

Syntax that needs to exist:
  1. Function calls
  2. Object message passing
  3. Container references (array, dict, and even list)

Should passing a message to an object return a function? For instance,
(a.foo 1 5) expands to ((msg a foo) 1 5). Sounds like a good
idea. Then function calls and container references can differentiate
based on the type of object involved.

Allow class redeclarations to extend the existing class, not replace
it.

Eval definitely needs to be rewritten recursively, so that special
forms can call it. Use continuations or something to allow goto.

a la Ruby: all funtctions are actually methods. Normal functions are
actually methods of an implicit global object. Also, because of the
smalltalk-like semantics, there are no member references. Thus, there
is no need for a member operator: everything can be done with (obj
msg). NOT TRUE if I want to have normal sounding functions :p

Syntax idea: when (not) is passed multiple arguments, it puts a
function call together and negates the return. For instance:
(not = x 10) --> (not (= x 10))

Put everything on hold: all this needs to be implemented top-down as
objects inheriting from classes.

What is the distinction between a class and a member of that class?
Should we prohibit inheriting from C types? Perhaps only prohibit
multiple-inheriting from C types.

struct Class {
  ns_t namespace;
}

struct Object {
  int num_parents;
  val_t* parents; // the classes (val_t for references)
  void* internal; // for builtins and their inheritors
  ns_t namespace;
};

POTENTIALLY EARTH SHATTERING CONCEPT:
Create a Yalie library that mimics the functionality of Lex and Yacc.
Eliminate the need for code walkers. Forms can be lisp macros on
steroids.

An even newer thought on symbols: symbols should hold their own values
indexed by THREAD. These can be stacks of (scope.val) pairs, so that
when climbing the stack the appropriate value can be restored.

Python-like global scoping can be achieved by pointing directly to the
(key.val) pair in a containing scope. Very clean. Does that present
problems for freeing? Envs will need to keep a list of globalized
variables not to free.

A new thought on symbols: Perhaps symbols can hold their own values
indexed (in an internal dict) by scope. The scopes will be globally
unique, so they can just be compared by pointer. Each symbol will then
have its own hash table, but that's ok because all that overhead is
managed at readtime. Does looking up every env in the symbol save any
time over looking up the symbol in every env?

__Symbols__
Contain a cons list of lookup envs?
Can't be envs because parse is at runtime.
Cons list must contain other symbols.
(Remember that even imported Global envs share symbols with the main)
How to print? Easy, now that it contains symbols.
Now environments must contain the symbols
    to append to new symbols they generate.
NO: what if environments didn't modify their
    symbols at all? Does that cause any problems?
Symbols need a cons list of other symbols? That's not symmetric...
Symbols rather need a cons list of strings.
How does all this interact with globals...?
THERE SHOULD BE NO SPECIAL GLOBALS. ALL LEXICAL!!! 
(This would be limiting...)
Should environments have a special parent for the builtins...?
Toplevel envs (including imported ones) should.
Then they can only shadow builtins locally.
How will globals work on import?
ALL envs share the symbols list, but lexically
    related envs can share a globals list.
Symbol lookup: globals->lexical(->builtins)
WAIT!!! Can symbols hold their own bindings? That would be WAY
	faster for lookups. 
INTERESTING THOUGHT: Symbol identity can be used to distinguish between
same-named symbols that refer to different environments.
	   This would allow symbols to hold their own
	   bindings somewhat better.

----------THE IDEA-------------:
There is a meta-global list of symbol namestrings by which symbols can
be compared. The symbol object stores its bound value. These objects
are created at readtime by referencing a simple list of
already-instantiated symbols. This list is the lexical environment. A
"global" directive a la Python allows symbols to be pulled down from
higher scopes. DOES THIS POSE A PROBLEM FOR RESOLVING IMPORT SCOPES,
WHICH CAN CHANGE AT RUNTIME? Take another cue from Python: imports
create genuine userspace objects, not new symbols. Referencing an
object in a module is no different from referencing an index from a
list. But that ruins the gain from having symbols hold their own
values. To have this work, imported modules must NOT be in userspace,
so that symbols within them can be resolved at readtime. On the other
hand, the main speed advantage is in compiling individual functions,
not in looking them up.

Things to do immediately:
    input (DONE!)
    quoting/unquoting (DONE!)
    function parameters (DONE!)
    exceptions (Done, but see below)
    stack unwinding (Working! but no protect yet)
    imports, classes

Idiosyncratic rules:
    symbols may not begin with a digit (this restriction has been lifted)
    pre/postfix syntax must be on the same line (this is necessary)

Syntax:
    # comments
    ` semiquote
    , unquote
    ; unquote-splice
    @ ref
    "/' strings/raw

Other symbols to make use of:
    & (binary operator for and?)
    $ 
    [ ] (implicit ls?)
    { } (used as an alternative delimiter for body expressions?)
    | (replacement for dotted lists?!?!)
    \
    ~ (special syntax for "not"? NO! "not" is given new semantics above)


Scrap the :b keyword arguments to functions. Instead allow {}
delimiters to be substituded for () whenever the expression will
contain a body. This is a sufficient signal to indenters, and it makes
missing parentheses much easier for the interpreter to identify in
error messages.

Could a continuation-passing style allow for a recursive eval function?

When everything is a pointer in C, it becomes easier to make
everything an object. Use the enum type.

All environments should point to the same dictionary for get_sym. This
should be independent of the "parent" field, so that imported modules
can still share symbols with the global scope.  OR!!!  Environments
can have their imported names stored in the class. Then, when symbols
are looked up inside that environment, the names are automatically
adjusted!!! SWEET IDEA!!!

UNWIND-PROTECT SHOULD BE A FEATURE OF fn (and form?)! "break" can be
just a goto statement inside the predefined loops

FORBID TOPLEVEL [] SYNTAX! (Brilliant!) (Terrible?) (just reset the
input after complete lines, so as to trigger a 'no [ at beginning of
file error'?)  NO! Require that prefix and postfix syntax be on the
same line as the values they operate on. Enforce this rule both in the
REPL and in text code. Use the peek_token() function to enable this.
HERE: The REPL should only accept single forms on any given line. The
parser should parse entire files before starting evaluation.

Exceptions need to be built from the entire stack. They should be
built in place without being passed up the stack. If nothing "catches"
the exception, it can then be RETURNED directly from lisp_eval.

The parser should signal an error for malformatted keywords, for
instance symbols such as ":keyword:member". Also, consider introducing
special syntax into the parser to make it easier to catch a failure to
close parentheses.

There needs to be a function for generating a fresh global scope
containing all builtin functions and constants. These will be used as
base Env objects for imported namespaces.

Everything an object? Yes!  How does python handle "a = 7 ; if x: ..."
for printint value? Answer: poorly.  Are python functions/classes
objects themselves?

Symbols referenced from an imported module do not actually have to be
the exact same objects as the originals. The Global environment can
create a new symbol object whose lookup properties point work
differently from that symbol in its original context. Since the two
can never be eq'd, this won't cause any problems.  DIFFERENT APPROACH:
Environments will take a parameter giving their imported context. All
symbol lookups will thus add module names to the front end of any
symbols within them. This dovetails with the notion that all
Environments will share a list of symbols with the importing env.

Eventually add support for pronouns :)

no function should ever need to make sure that it's arguments are
legally lists. This should be checked by eval or apply.

"let" needs to check for globalness to do temporary replaces.  it
should also be able to temporarily overwrite car's, cdr's, and other
data fields in the same temporary way. (how would the (let a b)
operator resolve its own scope? perhaps it can refuse to do that
because of the parens required to take a car. but the same problem
exists for global variables...) (Perhaps I can reuse the
"unwind-protect" functionality to accomplish this...)

When let is called as (let x y), it should throw an exception if x is
a global variable, because the scope will not be well defined? (Unless
we want to start adding termination conditions to
callstacks. Actually, this could be helpful in implementing
unwind-protect...)

can let define a recursive function? lambda has to hang on its lexical
scope, but 
(let a (lambda (x)
       	 (if (= x 0)
	     x 
	     (a (- x 1)))))

"if" should take an arbitrary number of args, as in "cond" but w/o
parentheses. like arc.

Member/method reference: Classes superclass Environment? Environments
as objects? The member operator "." finds the member in the referenced
namespace. If the member is a function (method), it will be wrapped in
a lambda that automatically passes the instance as the first argument.
OR--
Member operator is ':' and operates on symbol lookup. Namespaces
(envs) need to be objects in userspace!!! Symbol lookup knows how to
tell the difference between a namespace (or classdef) and an instance
of a class with regard to wrapping methods in the appropriate
lambda. YESSSS!!!!! This is how to do it.

Builtin polymorphic functions should check for class methods.

There will be no Python Class/Lisp Class dichotomy, as there is for
functions and forms.

class Lispy_Class():
   def __init__( self, E, parents_list ):
   	  self.E = E  #E is kept solely for associating new methods
	  	      #with their lexical scope. No method/member
	      	      #lookups will use it.
	  self.parents_list = parents_list
   def lookup( self, symbol ):
       ### Will need to be prepared to wrap methods.

(class My_Class (Parent1 ... Parentn) (arg1...argn)
   (


Argument list syntax:
Graham uses a dot '.' for &rest.

TYPES:
Cons
Atom:
  Int
  Float
  Array
  Dict
  String (no char)
  Fn
  Form
  Env?
  Stack?
  Class/Instance?

SPECIAL FORMS:
quote
fn (lambda)
form (as lambda, but for a macro)
set-globally
set-locally (will be called by "let")
if-goto
unwind-protect (Py?) (will modify Stack objects) (part of fn?)

PREDEFINED LISP FORMS:
semiquote
if
goto
tag
return?
def,deform
for
while
do (optional block name?)
let
ref
call

PREDEFINED PYTHON FUNCTIONS:
eval
cons car cdr setcar setcdr
+ - * / // % = < <= > >=
id (test whether two pointers point to the same place)
is? (eq)
and or not
{array,dict,string}
null
isnum iscons ... ot just (type ...)
put (print) ...
dir (as in Python!)
exit

PREDEFINED LISP FUNCTIONS
ls (list)
len
map
append
ret


Concepts:
- Lisp-1.
  - First element need only evaluate to a function, and functs are atoms.
    - equivalent: (eval `(+ 1 1)) (eval (ls `+ 1 1)) (eval (ls + 1 1))
  - Compensation for shadowing drawbacks:
    - Pervasive use of methods and namespaces
    - Shortened function names, like "ls" for "list"
- Python-like namespaces: dict-based classes, scopes, and modules
- Python-like full lexical scoping.
- Builtin types: int, float, string
- Builtin data structures: cons, array, dictionary (others in libraries?)
- Fully polymorphic base functions, everything is an object
- clean C API, dynamic .so importing
- ()/{} syntax, "/' strings, and readtime translation of `,; operators (~!|?)
- New forms of "if" (Paul Graham), "not", "let", "for"
- Yacc-like functionality available for implementing forms
